---
layout: post
title: Get Vaccinated!
date: 2021-03-04
parent: News
---

Learn Teochew is back after the New Year’s break!

Covid-19 has caused a lot of suffering around the world in the past year, and
everyone has been affected in one way or another. However there is now some
hope in the form of vaccines, which have been developed at unprecedented speed
to fight this virus.

In this post we would like to introduce some Teochew vocabulary for talking
about vaccines:

 * guêng1zuang6 bên7dag8 • 冠狀 病毒 • coronavirus
 * huam6bên7 / huang6bên7 • 患病 • infectious disease
 * bên7dag8 • 病毒 • virus
 * ig8miao5 / êg8miao5 • 疫苗 • vaccine
 * zu3sia7 • 注射 • injection
 * ziab4zêng3 • 接種 • to vaccinate (ziab4 - literary; zih4 - vernacular)

Some people may be concerned about whether the vaccines are safe, because many
rumors and pieces of disinformation are being transmitted by social media. Most
countries have regulatory agencies that rigorously check the safety of
medicines and vaccines before they are allowed to be used. Vaccines that have
been approved in multiple countries are therefore highly likely to be safe. Be
sure to check what you hear online or from people you know with reliable
sources, such as public health institutions and medical professionals. If you
are not sure about whether something is true or not, just wait a while and
don’t forward it.

A month ago, the Lianhe Zaobao newspaper in Singapore produced a set of videos
in five Chinese “dialects” commonly spoken in Singapore, where medical
professionals who have received the vaccine explained the process for the
general public. They were targeted at older persons who may be more comfortable
in dialects than Mandarin or English. The languages were: Hokkien, Teochew,
Cantonese, Hakka, and Hainanese.  The original article is
[here](https://www.zaobao.com.sg/zvideos/news/story20210204-1121782).

Below, we transcribe the Teochew video in Peng'im and characters, so that you
can follow along and learn some Teochew!

<iframe src="https://players.brightcove.net/4802324430001/NkXjc3H0l_default/index.html?videoId=6229008856001" width="300" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Transcription and translation of the video

The Teochew video is presented by Ms Janet Chong (鍾年珠), a nurse at the
Singapore General Hospital. Pronunciation of some words is influenced by
Mandarin or Hokkien; the standard Teochew pronunciations are listed in brackets
beside the the original.

<hr />

Dai5ge1 ho2, ua2 si6 Sing1gia1bo1 *Zhōngyāng Yīyùan*-gai5 hu3-si2.

大家 好， 我 是 新加坡 中央醫院 個 護士。

Hello everybody, I am a nurse at the Singapore General Hospital.

<hr />

Ua2-gai7 mia1 si6 *Janet Chong*.

我個 名 是 Janet Chong.

my name is Janet Chong.

<hr />

Ua2 in2-ging1 zu3sia7 -liao huang6-bên7 ig8miao5,

我 已經 注射 了 患病 疫苗，

I have been vaccinated against the [coronavirus] illness,

<hr />

ing1ui5 ua2 ai3 bo2hu6 ga1gi7 gah4 sing1bin1-gai7 nang5.

因為 我 愛 保護 自己 佮 身邊個 儂。

because I want to protect myself and the people around me.

<hr />

zu3sia7 ig8miao5 ao6, ua2 gag4dêg4 sing1tin2 *giang6kong1* [giang6kang1],

注射 疫苗 後， 我 覺得 身體 健康，

After receiving the vaccine, I felt healthy,

<hr />

bho5 si6mih4 hu3zag4êng7.

無 是乜 副作用。

and did not experience any side effects,

<hr />

gang2gag4 ang1cuang5 gah ang1sim1 zoi7 lou7.

感覺 安全 佮 安心 濟 𡀔。

and felt much safer and calmer.

<hr />

Miang2 zai3 dam1sim1 ziab4cug4diêh8 huang6bên7 bên7nang5,

免 再 擔心 接觸着 患病 病儂，

I don’t have to be worried about coming into contact with patients,

<hr />

in2 gang2lang7[gam2riem2]-diêh8 bên7dag8.

以 感染着 病毒。

and becoming infected with the virus.

<hr />

Sui1riang5 ziab4zêng3 ig8miao5 si6 ze6[ng]uang6-gai7,

雖然 接種 疫苗 是 自願 個，

Although the vaccination is voluntary,

<hr />

dang6 ziab4zêng3 ao6, le2 siu6 gang2lang7 gai7 hong1hiam2 si6 zing1zian3 zing1zian3 gai7 gê6.

但 接種 後，汝 受 感染 個 風險 是 真正 真正 個 下。

after receiving it, your risk of infection will be very much reduced.

<hr />

Ru2 zoi7 nang5 ziab4zêng3 ig8miao5, bian7dag8 ziu7 ru2zian3 gang1kou2 cuang7bo5 [tuang5bua3].

愈 濟 儂 接種 疫苗，病毒 就 愈正 艱苦 傳播。

The more people receive the vaccine, the harder it will be for the virus to transmit.

<hr />

Sing1ga1bo1 ziu7 nang7 dag8dêg8 cuang5kung5 gai7 miang2êg8

新加坡 就 （能） 達得 全群 個 免疫。

Singapore can then achieve herd immunity.

<hr />

Sing1ga1bo1 cong5 ging1ni5 kai1se2, koh8 long2zong2 muan2 lag8zab8-huê7 gai7 gog4nang5

新加坡 從 經年 開始，乞 攏總 滿 六十歲 個 國儂

This year, Singapore has started to offer every citizen aged 60 and above

<hr />

miang2hui3 ru-sêng ig8miao5.

免費 XX 疫苗。

free vaccination.

<hr />

De5hui1 le2 si6 *yùnfù* [rêng6hu6], u6 *niam6zong6* [ngiam6dong6] gai7 ming2gam2,

除非 汝 孕婦，有 嚴重 個 敏感，

Unless you are pregnant, or have a serious allergy,

<hr />

han5si6 hing7zai6 hua3liou5 gah4 diang6liou5,

還是 現在 化療 佮 電療，

or are currently receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy

<hr />

dao6zih4 [dao6di3] miang6ig8li2 zing1zian3 gê6,

導致 免疫力 真正 下，

which cause your immunity to be weakened,

<hr />

na7si6 bho5, le2 zu7 oi6sai2 zu3sia7 ig8miao5.

哪是 無，汝 就 會使 注射 疫苗。

If not [in those categories], you can receive the vaccine.

<hr />

Lao6nang5gê1 goh4 u6 iu-siang-kuang ho.

老儂家 閣 有 XXX 好。

Old people also have (?).

<hr />

Zing1zoi7 lao6nang5gê1 ru2 u6 san1-guin5:

真濟 老儂家 愈 有 三懸：

Many old people also have the three “highs”:

<hr />

huêh4-guin5, dang-gu-cung guin5, gah4 *din* [diam5]-rio7-bên7;

血懸、膽固醇 懸、佮 甜尿病；

high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes;

> din - Hokkien pronunciation

<hr />

ziu1sung3 zia2gui2 mang7sêng3-gai7 bên7,

就算 者幾 慢性個 病，

even with these chronic illnesses,

<hr />

han5si6 sêg4hab8 zu3sia7 ig8miao5.

還是 適合 注射 疫苗。

you can also receive the vaccine.

<hr />

U6 gai7 nang5 dang1sim1 oi6 u6 hog4zog4êng7 [hu3zag4êng7].

有個 儂 擔心 會 有 副作用。

Some people worry about side effects.

<hr />

Bho5sui1 dam1sim1,

無需 擔心，

Don’t worry,

<hr />

do1su3 gai7 hog4zog4êng7 dou1u6 zing1zian2 kêng1ui5,

多數 個 副作用 都有 真正 輕微，

in most cases the side effects are very minor,

<hr />

bi2lu5: gug8tao5 sng1tian3, zing1zian2 /sien¹¹/, han5si6 huag4sio1.

比如：骨頭 酸痛、真正 𤺪， 還是 發燒。

for example: aching bones, tiredness, or a fever.

> /sien¹¹/ 𤺪 - Hokkien “tired”, “fatigued”. In Teochew, hêg8 乏 is more commonly used.

<hr />

Siang6 gê1 gui2rig8 zu7 bho5se7 lou7.

上加 幾日 就 無事 𡀔。

It will be a few days at the most before you are well again.

<hr />

I1sêng1 gah4 hu6se6 oi6 do6 hiang7dion5 guang1cag4 le2 sa1zab8 hung1zêng1.

醫生 佮 護士 會 在 現場 關擦 汝 三十 分鐘。

Doctors and nurses will be at the scene to monitor you for thirty minutes [after vaccination].

<hr />

Ziu6suang3 zing1zian2 hang2gin3 gai7 cug4hiang7 mung7doin5, 

就算 真正 罕見 個 出現 問題，

Even if rare problems do occur,

<hr />

ma-u i1liao2 nang5uang5 ma7siong6 bang1zo6 le2.

X有 醫療 儂員 馬上 幫助 汝。

there will be medical personnel who will immediately assist you.

<hr />

Zig8dang1 le2 siu1dioh8 zêng3hu2 gai7 tong1di1su1

一旦 汝 受着 政府 個 （通知書？）

The moment you receive the notification from the government

<hr />

lung2dioh8 le2 zu3sia7 ig8miao5

輪着 汝 注射 疫苗

that it is your turn to be vaccinated

<hr />

le2 zu7 oi7sai2 ki2mong2 gao3 liang6loh8so2 yìyūe.

汝 就 會使 XX 到 聯絡所 依約。

you can go to the community centre to make an appointment.

<hr />

Ua2 i1ging5 zu3sia7 liao6 ig8miao5,

我 已經 注射 了 疫苗，

I have already been vaccinated,

<hr />

ê6 zig8-gai7 ziu7 lung2dioh8 le2 lou1!

下一個 就 輪着 汝 𡀔！

soon it will be your turn!
